you are in the largest wastewater
treatment plant in the world
why does Chicago have that well that's a
good question I have no idea it's how we
were founded and where the treatment
plant is located and the area that its
services we service about 5 million
people
I've been with the district for 27 years
yeah I'm not looking to retire I like
coming to work the district actually was
a public health agency which has is very
true if you had nothing of polluted
water flowing down the waterways think
how horrible that'd be it does give me a
lot of satisfaction to be doing
something for the community in general
it's a job that does something besides
give you a paycheck
this is my world we're at the very end
of the whole process right now this is
the final product but I mean along the
way there's so many different pieces of
the puzzle you once one goes down
it affects before and after yeah so it's
like a big train
well when it rains that means business
is good for us because the sewers we
have a combined sewer so storm water and
wastewater all conveyed to the plant in
the same conduit so when it rains we get
a huge influx you get a major flushing
of the toilet as you might call it
well this plant can treat in one minute
with the average size plant treats in a
day
there are eight tanks there about 17
feet deep water is brought about 1 foot
per second to allow inorganic material
to sell on the bottom of these tanks
before flows out to the primary settling
things they are aerated so this air
going through to allow their water to a
lot of heavy material get suspended in
the air so you want sell and the bottom
anything set up to the bottom of these
tanks that gets gets pumped out to the
dumpster then to a landfill
usually they figure once they spread it
out in the drying cells to dry they're
talking about six weeks if the weather's
good of course that's a it's another
thing as weather dependent if it rains
add that much more time to it it's hard
to dry things in the rain our property
continues considerably beyond that on
the other side there's another probably
a good mile of drying cells
so after the primary settling thanks the
effort goes into ahead retreat
it's the wastewater mixed with the
microorganisms that the bacteria need
which is darker brown well what's going
on here in these tanks is whatever stuff
that comes in from the primary certainly
tastes that we did not treat their
organic material we have to use the bugs
the microorganisms in this world
there is a bacteria that will consume
every item you can imagine the shampoo
the people down the drain the hair oils
they put down the drain the bleaches all
that other stuff that going down the
drain there is some bacteria out there
that will change that organic molecule
to carbon dioxide and water as a
by-product and that is what we harness
for the major cleanup around here there
are events that cause that cleanup
process to go wacko like a slug the
cyanide somebody dumped illegally into
the pipe it'll kill every bacteria and
every protozoa in our process and one of
the things we do to avoid that is
monitor those processes we count the
number of protozoans and the filaments
of bacteria that are seen on a regular
basis in that tank so that we know when
it's operating well and when it's been
kicked off too one way or the other
drawing up one milliliter in this case
should be at eye level according to the
Illinois Department of Public Health
when you read your pipette we dispense
it into the sterile funnel then the
bacteria end up on the filter the filter
has this graph on it so that it's easy
to count handled sterile II so that
nothing contaminates the filter it's
transferred to an agar plate after 24
hours what was one bacteria on a filter
becomes about 8 million bacteria 8
million is a big city as opposed to one
little guy living in the sticks
so after 24 hours these bigger blue
bumps are the ones we're counting so now
that's that the bugs have eaten solids
and they get heavy and they want to
settle out we put them in a final
settling tank Road we call it a
clarifier what's at the top is we're
finished it's going over the over the
Weir's and out to the canal and we've
treated it's like 99.9 percent cleaned
you